# Lecture 03

1. Objects have state, identity, and operations
   * State is the variables
   * Operations are the methods
   * Identity is specific to Object-Oriented programming
      * Not a name
	  * Can have multiple objects produced from the same blueprint, each being
	  unique.
2. Refresher on this, local vs. instance vars, p. of 02.pdf
   * Local variables - declared inside methods and do not exist if the method
   is not executing
   * Instance variables - declauded outside methods and part of the state of the
   particular object. They came into being with the object's creation and they
   cease to exist when the object is discarded.
   * Class variables - they exist regardless of whenever a class has objects in
   memory
   * `this` is a keyboard allowing an object to refer to itself, translates
   to "I, the object."
      * A class is a blueprint, and an object is a product of the blueprint created
	  in memory. `this` refers
3. Inheritance through interfaces and abstract classes
specific
   * An interface is a contract. As soon as some class delares "implements" the
   program ill not run unless all methods in the implemented interface are
   present.
   * The original from of OO inheritance is the abstract or concrete class.
   * An abstract class has at least one method that has the keyword `abstract`
   which in English translations to "unimplmented" or "I am NOT providing method
   code."
   * A program with an abstract class will NOT compile until a child class has
   been made that implements the abstract method.

```java
// Extending an exiting class
public class RaceCar extends Vehicle {
   
}

// concrete classes are extended like abstract except the program will run if
// they are not extended. The code has no missing functionality so it can compile.

// Interfaces are made of only abstract methods which is equilvalent to an
// absract class that only has abstract methods.
public interface Locomotion {
	void move();
}

public class Grasshopper implements Locomotion {
	public Grasshopper(int size, String color) {
		super(size, color);
	}

	// This is an annotation, tells the compiler you are trying to implement
	// some existting method signature.
	@Override
	public void move() {
		System.out.println("hop");
	}
}

public class Bee implements Locomotion {
	@Override
	public void move() {
		System.out.println("fly");
	}
}
```

Imagine we are writing Operating System software and needed a method to kill
processes kill().

By mistake, I declare

public void kill();

Without `@Override` Java will say "OK< you are making a new method"
