# Lecture 04

## Interfaces vs. Abstract Classes
* An interface is a class that has no implemented methods. It has all signatures
of methods that need to be implemented by future classes.
* An abstract class may have all methods declared abstract (then it is
functionally an interface) or it can have some implemented methods, but at least
one abstract method.
* "Abstract" translated into English means "unimplemented."
* Abstract classes allowed multiple inheritance before Java. This led to the
diamond problem, which leads to very difficult to debug bugs.
* We still needed composition of functionality for new classes; e.g. if we have
a `LegacyVehicale` class and we would want to add emissions test functionality,
we would add a Catalyst interface.
* Abstract classes and concrete classes are inherited with the keyword `extends`,
while interrfaces are inhereted with the keywork `implements`. We can have ONE
parent class but MANY parent interfaces.

```java
public interface Locomotion {
	void move();
}

public class Grasshopper extends Insect implements Locomotion {
	public Grasshopper(int size, String color) {
		super(size, color);
	}

	@Override // prevents typos when overriding method signatures
	public void move() {
		System.out.println("hop"); }
	}

public class Bee extends Insect implements Locomotion, Polination {
	@Override
	public void move() {
		
	}

	public void makeHoney() {
		System.out.println("Honey time");
	}
}
```
## Static Typing and Dynamic Binding
* Java, C#, C are statically typed.
* Python is not.
* Static typing means each variable, which is a location in memory, has a class
type or primitive type associated with it. The lanagauge prohibits assignment of
incompatile variables.
```java
int age = 23;
age = "John Doe"; // Thorws a compiler error
```
```python
age = 23
age = "John Doe" # No problemo
```
Python is great for short code because of the above smart recognition; but
nobody has written a large project in Python because most variables in large
Projects are custom types/user-defined classes and it is easy to erroneously
assign the wrong kind of object.

Java's typing is not strictly static: every child or desendant can be assigned
to an ancestor. Called dynamic binding, parents cannot be assigned to descendant
varibles.

Cannot assign Vehicle to GasolineVehicle but we can assign in the reverse.

Children have all the functionality of their parents + some new functionality.
If the same-name thod was overriden, Java ALWAYS selects the MOST RECENT
implementation.

E.g. if Vehicle has a `move()` method and GasolineVehicle has a `move()` method,
we can never invoke `Vehicle.move()` from GasolineVehicle.

If somebody tried to invoke `super.move()`, it will not work. Java will execute
the last move implemention.

## Examples

1. `Locomotion b;` This is OK! Sets aside a memory location to hold Locomotion
or it's decendants.

2. `b = new Grasshopper;` Grasshopper implements Locomotion, so the assignment
is valid. Note the parent, locomotion, only knows its own methods, in this case
`move()`. It knows no children-specific methods.

3. `b.move()` Dynamically goes to the latest implemenation of move()
