# Lecture 05

1. Continueing examples of static typing vs dynamic assignment
   - Java is statically typed but has dynamic binding: children can be assigned
   to parent references because they implement all of the methods of their
   parent.
   - Parents cannot be assigned to child references because they do not implment
   all the child/decendant's methods.
   - Siblings CANNOT be assigned to a sibling's reference, because each sibling
   has some method that is unique to it.
   - When a method has been overridden, at runtime Java selects the MOST RECENT
   implementation.

2. Java.lang.Object
   - `toString()`
   - `getClass()`
   - others

## Examples
1. `Locomotion l;` This is  okay, can set aside memory for abstract classes and
interfaces. Abstract references CAN be declared.
2. `Grasshopper g;` This is OK! In english: the memory address labeled with g
will store another address to a Grasshopper descendant.
3. `Pollination p = new Pollination();` COMPILE ERROR: cannot instantiate
abstract type Pollination
4. `Insect i = new Insect(3, "Green");` COMPILE ERROR: cannot instantiate
abstract type Insect
5. `Insect i = new Grasshopper(2, "Brown")` COMPILE ERROR: cannot instantiate
abstract type Grasshopper
6. `Katydid k = new Katydid(3, "Green");` Okay
7. `Grasshopper g  = k;` OK because: 1. child & concrete
8. `Locomotion l = new Katydid(3, "Brown");` Okay because abstract parent
provides implementation of move()
9. `g = l;` COMPILE ERROR: incompatible types because l is an ancestor of g
   - How to fix? Casting! (tells the compiler "Hands up, I know what I am
   doing.") `g = (Katydid) l;` The compiler agrees so long as its rules are not
   broken; for example it will reject a cast to a Tractor from Locomotion.
   Here it checks that Katydid is the inheritance of locomotion and allows the 
   cast. "OK, you are the boss." Now Grasshopper aquired a Katydid object which
   it can trast as a Grasshopper.
10. `Grasshopper g = new Locust(3, "Red")` OK because child & concrete
11. `Katydid k = (Katydid) g;` Compiler checks compatibility and sees Katydid
is compatible and lets it through. BUT at runtime, this throws
ClassCastException. Exceptionis a "potentially recoverable error"
12. `g = new Mantis(4, "Green");` Compiler error: incompatible types
13. `Locomotion l = new Katydid(3, "Brown")` OK
14. `l.attack()` Compiler error
15. `l.move()` Print "hop"
