# Lecture 06

## Static vs Dynamic

On the test, you're going to have to be able to be able to be the compiler for
these problems. Tell if there's a compile or runtime error, plus what error?

1. `Insect k = new Katydid(3, "Green")` This is okay!
   1. `k.attack()` This is okay! Prints "Bite"!
   2. `k.atennae()` Compiler error! Method attenae undefined for type Insect.
2. `Grasshopper g = new Katydid()` This should be okay.
   1. `g.feedOn()` Will use the Katydid version, which is "variety".
3. `Polination p = new Bee(1, "Golden-Black", "Lake")`
   1. `p.getSwarm()` Compiler error: getSwarm() undefined for type Pollination.
4. `Matis m = new Mantis(5, "Green")`
   1. `m.move()` Print "crawl".
   2. `Insect i = m.preyOn()` Grandchild gets assigned to the parent and then
   passed on to a grandparent reference. OK.
   Undefined compiler error.
5. `Insect i = new Mantrix(4, "Yellow")`
   1. `i.move()` Insect does not have a move() so it will throw a method.
   2. `((Matis) i.move())` Print "crawl" because we overrode. This fixes the
   example above because the compiler does not have the ability to understand runtime type.
   3. `((Mantis) i).preyOn().attack()` PreyOn returns a Grasshopper object, and
   we invoke attack on it. We do not have an attack() implementation in Locut
   so we use Grasshopper's "bite".
   4. `i = new Bee(1, "Golden-Black", "Hill")` OK
   5. `((Bee) i).makeHoney()` OK because we correcty overrode the compiler and
   will print "orange blossom".
6. `Matis m = new Mantis(4, "Green")` OK
   1. `((Insect) m).attack()` Upcasting to Insect and called attack(), which
   will downcast to the latest implementation and print "strike". Upcasting is
   not useful because dynamic binding "nerfs" it.
7. `Insect i = new Mantis(4, "Green")`
   1. `((Bee) i).makeHoney()` Accepted by compiler, throws ClassCastException
   at runtime.
   2. `Matnis m = new Matis(); ((Bee) ((Insect) m)).makeHoney()` Fools the
   compiler and it says OK, because both upcast and downcast are compatible.
   ClassCastException at runtime: incompatible types.

> DOCUMENT CODE for 228 projects, makes it easier to read in the future.

## Object class

Three seperate concepts:

1. Class: the bueprint for some functionality package.
2. Object: a product made from the blueprint that sits in memory.
3. The Object class: completely different and is the parent class of all classes
in Java. When a class is written by the programmer and does not extend another
class, Java assumes that the words "extends Object" are implicitly there.

The object class contains default implementations for a number of methods. Some
are useful, some are not.

* `toString()` mostly useless, prints a hash code and sundry. Has to be
overriden to be useful.
* `getClass()` tells you what the runtime type of a variable is. We will see it
when we define an `equals()` method.
* `equals()` mostly useless
