# Lecture 09

## More on static variables

Class variables == static variables
* Part of the blueprint that is the class.
They Come into existence at the start of the program and edure for the duration of the program.
* They have no knowledge of the runtime state of the program and exist even if their containing class has never been instantiated.
* All static variables act as as global variables inside their classes because all objects of the same class access the same location in memory (the static variable),
which is in a place in memory reserved for static members.
* Private, public, protected, default keywords work as expected with static variables.
	* `private int numberOfPersons` is seen by all Person classes,
	but nobody else.
	* `public int numberOfPersons` is seen by ALL code and is effectibely a global variable that can be accessed by calling Person.numberOfPersons.

Static methods are part of the Platonic world of classes and do not see the "this" reference for any information about their host object.
They are pure functions in the sense that they can only effect parameters that have been passed to them,
unlike normal methods, which have access to all instance variables of the object.
Example: `Math.cos(double angle)` computes a cosine of an angle that is provided to it as a paramter.
It can access NO non-static members.

Static methods cannot access non-static methods directly.

```java
public class MainClass {
	public static void main() {
		myMethod(); // throws a compiler error: cannot access non-static
		            // member myMethod1.
		
		// fix: instantiate myself so I can call a normal method on myself
		MainClass newMc = new MainClass();
		newMc.myMethod1();
	}
}
```

Why have the above hurdle? 

1. So we can start the main() method at the start of the program,
and main() is executed when there are no objects in memory!

2. Static methods drastically diminish the possibility of difficult bugs!
Because they are not allowed to touch instance variables as they please and "dirty" the state of the program.

Static methods can work with any and all objects provided:

1. They were passed as parameters.
2. They created the objects.

Static methods and variables DO NOT have a host object.

## Exceptions

Why do exceptions exist?
Before exceptions, when an error occured, you have to anticipate the error and handle it immediately as it arises.
An Error may also mean an abnormal condition.

Exceptions say "many errors are recoverable" so we will raise a flag to indicate an abnormal condition has occured
and either the original method or any of this previously involking methods can handle it!

Mechanism of exceptions:

1. An error occurs
2. An exception object is created and "thrown."
3. This object is passed up the call stack to ancestor calling methods.
4. If it is not handled by `main()` or any of the methods it calls the program will terminate.

Example:

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
	InputStream istream;
	File inputFile;
	try {
		inputFile = new File(args[0]); // The constructor method throws an exception
		istream = new InputStream(inputFile);
	} catch (FileNotFoundException ex) {
		System.out.println("file " +
		args[0] + " not found");
	}
}
```

General syntax for catching exceptions:

```java
try {
	// statements that might cause exceptions
} catch (exception-1 id-1) {
	// statements to handle this exception
} catch (exception-2 id-2) {
	// statements to handle this exception
}
...
// All exception objects are derived from a concrete class
// Exception maintained by Java
} catch (Exception e) {
	// Will catch all exceptions thrown
} finally { // Optional
	// Statements to execute every time this block executes
}
```

Checked vs. Unchecked exceptions:

* unchecked exceptions are not expected to be recoverable.
* Checked exceptions REQUIRE try-catch OR throws statements
	* Put Throws after method signature if you are not putting try-catch inside the method.
	This tells the compiler somebody else in the callstack will handle it.
