# Lecture 10

7. Throwing exceptions

```java
public class Stack {
	public Object pop() throws EmptyStackException {
		if (Empty())
			throw new EmptyStackExcpetion("There are no elements on the stack");
		else // do things
	}
}

// Custom exception: override 2 constructors from Exception:
class EmptyStackException extends Exception {
	public MyException() { super(); }
	public MyException(String s) {
		super(s);
	}
}
```

Checked exceptions need to be handled by try-catch OR throws.
Throws defers the try-catch to a method earlier in the stack.

RuntimeException is a descendant of Exception that includes desecndants:

- `IndexOutOfBoundsException`
- `ClassCastException`
- `NullPointerException`

All of the above are UNCHECKED which means the compiler WILL NOT harass you to handle them with try-catch or throws!

This is because they are most often bugs and the program needs to be edited for correctness.
Recovering from them is not helpful.

## Big-O Notation

We need a notion of algorithm efficiency.

Canidates:

- time elapsed
	- If we just count seconds, we're not looking at the processor speed.
- memory footprint
- ease of implementation (python wins)
- ease of maintenance (java wins)

Big-O checks worst-case performance counted in atomic computer instructions/steps.

It is a function of how many data items we processed (number of elements in an array of size n)

When we say Big-O is an algorithm is O(n), this means we did ~1000 computer steps to process 1000 elements.

When we say Big-O is O(n^2), the computer must go throw ~1,000,000 steps to process 1000 elements.

How do we computer Big-O?

1. We find the worst-case scenerio that requires the algorithm to perform the most work in number of steps.
2. We count the steps, assuming our input is an array of size n elements.
This is labeled T(n) - the actualy abstract number of steps needed.
3. O(n) is T(n) but with all the constants and non-significant polynomial terms REMOVED.
Only the first and most significant term matters.

### Example

Finding if all elements of one array are in another array == determine array equality.
Both arrays a and b are of size n.

Worst case: All but the last element are present in the array.

```
i = 0								1 op
while i < N							n+1 ops (n true, 1 false)
	found = false					1 op (*n)
	j = 0							1 op(*n)
	while j < n						n+1 ops (n true, 1 false)
		if a[i] == b[j]				1 op (*n*n)
			found = true			1 op(*n)
			break					1 op(*n)
		++j							
	if !found
		return false
	++1
return true
```

Counting steps: 

1. If the algorithm is recursive, we have to do complex orks to determine how many times it calls itself.
2. If the line is a loop, it is usually linear.
3. If the line is NOT a loop, it is usually a single step/operation.

