# Lecture 20

## ListIterator Interface

The `ListIterator` interface extends the `Iterator` interface, taking advantage of the fact that elements are linearly ordered.

The internal state of a ListIterator includes a logical cursor position.
It is helpful to think of it as a kind of text cursor — a vertical line occupying the "gap" between elements.

`ListIterator<E> listIterator():` Returns an iterator with logical cursor position 0.

`ListIterator<E> listIterator(int pos):` Returns an iterator with logical cursor position pos.

We can move a `ListIterator`, it backwards and forwards through a `List` object.
That is, in addition to the `hasNext()` and `next` methods of the `Iterator` class, a `ListIterator` also possesses `hasPrevious()` and `previous()` methods.
We will study the semantics of these and the other key `ListIterator` methods — `add()`, `set()`, and `remove()` — next time.

## ListIterator Methods

We can query a `ListIterator` for its current position using `int nextIndex()`.
This retursn the index of the element after the cursor; returns size() when at the end. 

and `int previousIndex():` Returns the index of the element that would be returned by a subsequent call to `previous()`.
I.e., it returns the index of the element before the cursor; and returns -1 when at beginning.

As usual we have the regular methods:

* `boolean hasNext()` true when nextIndex() < size().
* `E next()` Returns the element after the cursor and moves cursor forward.

There are also methods for iteratig in reverse:

* `boolean hasPrevious()` true when previousIndex() > 0.
* `E previous()` Returns the element before the cursor, moves cursor backward.

The remaining three methods are:

* `void remove()`
* `void add(E item)`
* `void set(E item)`

These methods potentially modify the list, based on the cursor position.

## Remove

The `remove()` method deletes the element behind the cursor or the element ahead of the cursor, depending on whether `next()` or `previous()` was called.

Example 1:

```
Initially:        |ABCDE
iter.next();      A|BCDE
iter.next();      AB|CDE
iter.remove();    A|CDE
```

Example 2:

```
Initially:        |ABCDE
iter.next();      A|BCDE
iter.next();      AB|CDE
iter.next();      ABC|DE
iter.previous();  AB|CDE
iter.remove();    AB|DE
```

* Calling `remove()` after `next()` deletes the element behind the curor and moves the cursor back.
* Calling `remove()` after `previous()` deletes the element in front of the cursor and does not move the cursor.

## Add

The `add()` method puts the new element behind the cursor and advances the cursor.

Example 3:
```
Initially:       |ABCDE
iter.add("X")    X|ABCDE
iter.add("Y")    XY|ABCDE
```

As next two examples show, `add()` alway inserts behind the cursor, regardless of wether previous or next was called.

Example 4:
```
Initially:         |ABCDE
iter.next();       A|BCDE
iter.add("X");     AX|BCDE
```

Example 5:
```
Initially:         |ABCDE
iter.next();       A|BCDE
iter.next();       AB|CDE
iter.previous();   A|BCDE
iter.add("X")      AX|BCDE
```

Example 6: to add an item at the end of the list, we simpyl have to place a new iterator there using `listIterator(list.size())`
```
Initially:         ABCDE|
iter.add("X")      ABCDEX|
iter.add("Y")      ABCDEXY|
```

## Set

The `set()` method behaves like remove(), modifying the element behind the cursor or the element ahead of the cursor, depending on whether `next()` or `previous()` was called.

Example 7:
```
Initially:         |ABCDE
iter.next();       A|BCDE
iter.next();       AB|CDE
iter.set("X");     AX|CDE
```

Example 8:
```
Initially:         |ABCDE
iter.next();       A|BCDE
iter.next();       AB|CDE
iter.next();       ABC|DE
iter.previous():   AB|CDE
iter.set("X")      AB|XDE
```

Like `remove()`, we cannot call `set()` without a prior to call `previous()` or `next`.
However, there is nothing wrong with calling `set()` twice in a row: It just updates the element.
