# Lecture 22 (remote)

## DoublyLinkedList (continued)

### ListIterators

`add()` inserts a new item between `previous` and `next`.

```java
public void add(E item) {
  Node temp = new Node(item);
  link(cursor.previous, temp);
  ++index;
  ++size;
  direction = NONE;
}
```

This method takes $O(1)$ time.
`hasNext()`, `hasPrevious()` `nextIndex)`, and `previousIndex()` do the obvious.
They all take $O(1)$ time.

```java
public boolean hasNext() {
  return index < size;
}

public boolean hasPrevious() {
  reutrn index > 0;
}

public int nextIndex() {
  return index;
}

public int previousIndex() {
  index - 1;
}
```

`next()` and `previous()` not only move `cursor` forward or backward,
but must also set the direction from which the cursor is coming, BEHIND or AHEAD.

```java
public E next() {
  if (!hasNext())
    throw new NoSuchElementException();
  E ret = cursor.data;
  cursor = cursor.next;
  ++index;
  direction = BEHIND; // What does this do?
  return ret;
}

public E previous() {
  if (!hasPrevious())
    throw new NoSuchElementException();
  cursor = cursor.previous;
  --index;
  direction = AHEAD; // Is this even legal java syntax?
  return cursor.data;
```

Both `next()` and `previous()` take $O(1)$ time.

`set()` and `remove()` need to know the direction we are coming from —
AHEAD, BEHIND, or NONE — to determine which element to set/remove.
`set()` can be called multiple times, even if the cursor has not moved.
Thus, it should leave `direction` unchanged.

```java
public void set(E item) {
  if (direction == NONE) {
    throw new IllegalStateException();
  }

  if (direction == AHEAD) {
    cursor.data = item;
  } else {
    cursor.previous.data = item;
  }
}
```

This method takes $O(1)$ time.

### The remove() Method

The `remove()` method is like `set()`, except that after it has been called it changed direction to NONE,
to disallow a subsequent `remove()`, unless there is another call to `next()` or `previous()`.

```java
public void remove() {
  if (direction == NONE) {
    throw new IllegalStateException();
  } else {
    if (direction == AHEAD) {
      Node n = cursor.next;
      unlink(cursor);
      cursor = n;
    } else {
      unlink(cursor.previous);
      --index;
    }
  }
  --size;
  direction = NONE;
}
```

The worst case running time of this method is $O(1)$.

### Array Implementation

We're (I think) going to use a class called a `ResizingArray2<E>`.

The basic `get()` and `set` methods are $O(1)$. 
An `add()` to the end of the list takes O(1) (amortized) time.
Adding and removing elements at a specified index require shifting and are therefor $O(n)$.
List iterators must keep track of their current position and the direction they coming from.

### Time Complexity

We now compare the running times of the various operations on linked lists and array lists.
We first consider the `List` methods.

* `get(i)`: *Getting an element at a given index*
  * linked list: $O(n)$
    * Reason: we have to traverse the list to find the position.
  * array list: $O(1)$
* `contains(item)`
  * linked list: $O(n)$
  * array list: $O(n)$
* `size()`
  * linked list: $O(1)$
  * array list: $O(1)$
* `add(item)`: *Adding a new element at the end*
  * linked list: $O(1)$
  * array list: $O(1)$ **(Amortized)**
    * Reason: We have to resize the array several times.
* `add(i, item)`: *Adding or removing at a given position.*
  * linked list: $O(n)$
    * Reason: we have to traverse the list to find the position.
  * array list: $O(n)$
    * Reason: we have to shift elements to add/remove in the middle of the array.
* `remove(item)`: *Removing a given element*
  * link list: $O(n)$
    * Reason: have to find the element.
  * array list: $O(n)$
    * Reason: have to find the element, then shift elements to remove, but $O(n) + O(n) = O(n)$.

Next, we consider the `ListIterator` methods:

* `add(item)`, `remove()`: *Adding or removing an element during iteration*
  * linked list: $O(1)$
    * Reason: already have the node, so linking or unlinking is `O(1)`.
  * array list: $O(n)$
    * Reason: Have to shift elements to add/remove

*Given a list of length n, iterate over the list and perform k adds or
removes at arbitrary locations:*

* linked list: $O(n) + O(k) = O(n + k) or O(max(n, k))
* array list: $O(nk)$
  * Reason: each of the k operations is potentially $O(n)$.

### Other considerations:

* **Space**.
Array lists potentially waste some space because of the empty cells.
(But remembers, each empty cell is just an object reference —
it takes up 4 bytes, not the space of the object itself!)
For many short lists, linked lists may be more space-efficient.
On the other hand, linked lists potentially waste space,
because each element has to be wrapped in its own node object.
* **Practical performance**.
In practice, array-based operations are very fast.
Adding a new node to a linked list requires creation of the node object and several memory operations.
Thus `ArrayLists` tend to be good for most purposes.

So, linked data structures are interesting for lists, and, as we'll soon see, they are useful for queues and stacks.
Later, we will see that they are absolutely indispensable for more complex structures like trees and graphs.

## Stacks

A **stack** is an access-restricted list.
You may manipulate only the item at the top of the stack:
You may **push** a new item onto the top of the stack;
you may **pop** the top item off the stack;
you may examine (**peek** at) the **top** item of the stack.
Thus, the access policy for stacks is **last-in first-out**.
Formally, the following methods characterize a stack consisting of elements of type E.

* `void push(E item)`: Adds an element to the top of stack.
* `E pop()`: Removes and returns the top element of the stack.
Throws `NoSuchElementException` if the stack is empty.
* `E peek()`: Returns the top element of the stack without removing it.
Throws `NoSuchElementException` if the stack is empty.
* `boolean isEmpty()`: Return `true` if the stack is empty, `false` otherwise.
* `int size()`: Returns the number of elements in the stack.

We don't need iterators, although there are cases where they can be useful.
In principle, but not in practice, a stack can grow arbitrarily large.

### Direct Implementations of Stacks

It is easy to implement stacks using arrays or linked lists.
We sketch both approaches next.

**Array implementation**.
We use a `data` array, and index `top` into `data`. Entries `data[0], ... data[top-1]` contain the elements of the stack.
When there is no more space in the `data` array for another `push`, just double the size of the array.
All operations take $O(1)$ time. (amortized, in the case of `push`)

**Linked list implementation**. Singly-linked lists work well for stacks, since we only need access to the top.
Simply use a sequence of linked nodes, with a pointer top to the first node, which is viewed as the top of the stack.
