# Lecture 24 (Infix and Postfix Notation)

## Infix Notation

Each binary operator is placed between its operands.

Each unary operator precedes its operand.

## Postfix Notation

Also called *Reverse Polish Notation* (RPN) in which operands come before operators.

Infix expression: `(7 - 11) * 2 + 3`
Postfix equivalent: `7 11 - 2 * +`

### Advantages of Postfix notation

* No need for paratheses.
* Postfix is easy for computers to evaluate.

### Implementing postfix evaluation

We use a stack; we never have any ambiguities in expressions.

Parse tokens left to right:

* If the token is an integer, push()
* If the token is an operator,
* pop() into rightOperand
* pop() into leftOperand
* Evaluate leftOperand - operator - rightOperand
* push(result)

After the end of the above input-reading loop, there should only be the resulting integer on the stack.
If there is more than one result, we have too many operators.

### Possible errors

* Too many operands
* Too many operators

## Infix to Postfix conversion

Alternative title: "How to make compuer evaluate basic arithmetic expressions."

Traditional arithemetic expressions use INFIX notation which has operator precedence AND parentheses.
These two features are here because we have many ambiguous expressions.
Parentheses are used to disambiguate.

In postfix notation, there is NO operator precedence OR ambiguity.

There are two approaches to evaluate an infix expressions:

* Use two stacks within one scan.
* Convert to postfix and solve.

Operator associativity is:

* 5+8 == 8+5 and (2+3)+5 == 2+(3+5)
* same!

BUT:

* (2-3) -5 != 2-(3-5)
* We are obligated to evaluate the leftmost of several subtractions first.
This means subtraction is left-associative.
* / and % have the same problem.

BY CONTRAST:

^ is right-associative:

2^3^4 == 2^(3^4) and NOT (2^3)^4

Precedence of operators is PEMMDAS — double M for multiplication and modulo operators.

Rank of an expression is not a mathematical concept but rather a computer science label for a running tally of how many operands and operators we have encountered.

Every number/operand increases rank by 1.
Every operator is -1.
Parentheses do not change the rank; they add 0.

We use rank to check if an expression is well formed.

An expression should start with a number and end with a number, and there should be two numbers around each operator.

Translated to rank: An expression should start with rank 1 unless the starting character is a paranethesis in which case it starts at 0 AND end with rank 1,
and in the middle it must stay within the range [0,1].
If it leaves the range, it is not well formed.

```
ex: 2  +  +  2
    1  0 -1  (error)
```

BUT the rank() method does not catch every malformed expression.
It cannot catch parenthesis errors.

```
(4+3
0101 <-- could not detect malformation

8>>/2
11101 <--- could not detect
```

Malformed expression:

```
4(+)3

Rank:
11011
```
Converted to postfix (via black box):
4+3 will throw and error insufficient operands.

Core algorithm for infix-to-postfix conversion is a single-stack algorithm:

The intution: read a sequence of tokens from left to right,.

1. If the token is a number, place it directly in the output string (that will be in postfix form).
2. If the token is an operator, it will pop all greater or equal precedence operators from the stack to output; then push.
3. After end of loop, pop() all remaining operators into output string.

At the end of parsing, pop() and appaend all remaining operators.

* ρ -- operator just read from the input token
* Θ -- operator just popped from the stack

```
If token is a number, append to output string.
Else:
    p is newly read operator
    while (!opStack.isEmpty() && prec(p) <= prec(opStack.peek()) {
        o = opStack.pop()
        append o to postfix
    }
    opStack.push(p)
```

Writing prec() method

```java
int precedence;
String token = myScanner.next();
try {
    int operand = Integer.parseInt(token);
} catch (Exception e) {
    precedence = prec(token);
}

int prec(String token) {
    int result = -1;
    switch(token) {
        case "+":
        case "-":
            result = 1;
            break;
        case "*":
        case "/":
        case "%":
            result = 2;
            break
        case "^":
            if (fromInput) {
                result = 4;
            } else {
                result = 3;
            }
            break;
        case "(":
            if (fromInput) {
                result = 5;
            } else {
                result = -1;
            }
            break;
        case ")":
            result = 0;
            break;
        default:
            throw new InvalidInputException();
    }
    return result;
}
```

> EXAM 3: You will need to grab a 15 character expression and convert it to postfix. 
You may be asked to write a prec() method, but not the main method.

Handling parentheses:

* Disambiguation markers who may change evaluation priority:
    * Subexpressions delineated by parentheses are evaluated first.
* Left parenthesis should not pop any operators, AND no operator should be able to pop left-parenthesis either!
    * 3 and 4 are taken, so we use 5 for left parenthesis.
    Nothing should be able to dislodge the parenthesis besides right parenthesis.
* Right parenthesis ends a subexpression.
Both parentehses must be deleted because they do not exist in postfix notation.
Right parenthesis does not go on the stack and does not go on postfix output.
Instead we treat ")" as a command: pop all operators and append to postfix until left-parenthesis is encountered.
Pop and discard the left parenthesis.
* Parentheses are right associative:
    * The first parentheses will be evaluated LAST.


### Big-O of Inflix to Postfix Conversion

* rank() -- rank does not absolutely need to be a seperate method
* infix2postfix()
* evalPostfix() O(n)

Rank is O(n) in number of tokens because it performs +1, -1, +0 per token.

evalPostfix() is O(n) pushes on a stack, up to O(n) pops, and less than the number of pushes for operator evaluations. O(n) total.

Infix2postfix: Max mumber of pop() operations in a single flush: O(n).
Max number of flushes O(n).
Does that mean this is O(n^2)?
NO.
I cannot pop() more than I pushed on the stack.
Max pushes per entire algorithm is O(n)