# Lecture 28 (trees)

Up to now, we've been working with linear data types.
We started with very simple data types but have been running into performance issues.
Now, we will change that by coming up with more and more complex datastructures.
There will always be worst case add removes.
Graphs and trees are going to be faster than linear time. (logn time)

## Graphs

Labeling an edge in a graph:

(origin_vertex, desination_vertex)

If the graph is undirected, either node can be origin or destination.

If the graph is directed, each edge looks like an arrow AND you cannot move against the arrow direction.

## Trees

A **tree** consists of a set of nodes and a set of edges that connect pairs of nodes.
A path is a connected sequence of zero or more edges. A tree has the property that there is exactly one path
(no more, no less) between any two nodes of a tree.

Some properties of Trees:

* Minimunally connected — $T$ is disconnected if any edge is removed.
* Maximally acyclic — $T$ contains a cycle if an edge is added.

$$
|E| = |V| - 1
$$

*E: Amount of edges, V: Amount of vertices.*

### Rooted trees

These trees have an entry point, or a root.

The maximum depth of a tree, is the height of that tree.

## Binary trees

Each node has at most two children.

* Left child: the child node on the left.
* Right child: the child node on the right.

A set of nodes T is a binary tree if

* it is *empty*

### Implemenation of Binary Tree Node

```java
// TODO
```

## Traversal

A traversal is a way of visiting each node in a tree once.

What you do when visiting a node 

```java
public static void traversePreorder(TreeNode<?> node) {
    // TODO
    if (node == null) return;
    System.out.println(node.data().toString() + " ");
    traversePreorder(node.left());
    traversePreorder(node.right());
}
```

## Binary Trees

Binary can be defined recursively.

Here are some properties of binary trees:
* An empty tree is a binary tree.
* A root With both subtress being binary trees is also a binary tree.
* null is a binary tree.
* A root with two binary subtrees is also a binary trees.
* Solitary root has height 0.
* No nodes have height -1.

We can compute height as follows recusively:

```
If null, height is -1.

Else, height = 1 + maxHeight(leftNode, rightNode)
```

```java
public static int height(TreeNode<?> node) {
    if (node == null) return -1;

    int lHeight = height(node.left());
    int rHeight = height(node.right());

    if (lHeight > rHeight) {
        return lHeight;
    } else {
        return rHeight;
    }
}
```

### Traversing trees

We enqueue the root.
```
-> While the queue is not empty: 
    Node current = dequeue();
    enqueue(current.left);
    enqueue(current.right);
    print current;
```