# Lecture 31

## Splay Tree

A flavor of self-balancing Binary Search Trees that guarantee height of the tree will be $O(logn)$.
They do this by always performing a "splay" operation after an add, delete, or search.

The splay operation promotes the current node of interest all the way to become the new root!

This is not too expensive because any promotion to root takes at least $O(logn)$ steps.
So reagrrangin the tree EVERY time costs: 

* $O(logn)$ to find the node + $O(1)$ to add or delete if necessary.
* + $O(logn)$ to promote node

### Splaying

Restructuring heuristics:

1. Performing rotations bottom-up along the access path and moves the accessed items all the way to the root.
2. Does the rotations in pairs, in an order depending on the structure of the access path.

How to splay a tree at node x?

Repeat a sequence of splaying steps (zig, zig-zig, zig-zag) until x is the root of the tree.

### Case 1: Zig

Parent of y of x is the tree root. Rotate the edge <x,y>.

```
    Y
   / \
  X   C
 / \
A   B
```

Rotate right:

```
  X
 / \
A   Y
   / \
  B   C
```

### Case 2: Zig-zig

1. Parent y of x is not the root (x has grandparent z).
2. x and y are both left or both right children.

```
      Z
     / \
    Y   D
   / \
  X   C
 / \
A   B
```

Rotate <y, z>:

```
    Y
   / \
  X   Z
 / \  |\
A   B C D
```

Rotate <x,y>:

```
  X
 / \ 
A   Y
   / \
  B   Z
     / \
    C   D
```

### Case 3: zig-zag

Used when both parent and grandparent do not form a single line of edges.

```
 Z       Z
Y         Y
 X       X
A B     A B
```

1. Pull granchild between both ancestors to become parent of both.
2. The great-grandchildren A and B get attached to their respective ancestor: left great-grandchild attached to left ancestor; right great-grandchild attached to right ancestor.
3. A full splay operation starts at some target node and promotes the node to be the new root of the tree.
4. You perform as many zig-zigs and zig-zags as necessary. Each climcs 2 edges (target node gets promoted to two edges higher)
5. But if the path to root is of odd length, we perform a single zip.
6. Overall count for 1 splay operation

### Data Access

All BST update operations can be implemenented by splaying

Access: If the item is stored in node X, splay at X; otherwise, splay at the last non-null node (ie, the leaf node) on the search path.

### Insertion

1. Search for the item.
2. Create a new node containing the item if not in the tree.
3. Splay the tree at the new node.

### Joining two BSTs

Two BSts Sa nd T such that all items in S are less than those in T. Combine S and T into a single tree.

1. Access the largest item in S. It is stored in node x. After the access.

### Deletion

1. Splay rightmost node in left tree. It is now the root of the left tree AND has no right subtree.
2. Attach right subtree as-is. The result is a splay tree.
3. Reattach the root to the grandparent.
4. Splay on the grandparent.