# Lecture 32

## Maps

Collection of key-value pairs where the key is any object/primative and the value is any object/primative.

* Keys are unique; values do not have to be.
* null keys are not accepted.

Examples in the real world:

* Dictionaries
    * key is a word
    * value is a collection of definitions
* Social Security Numbers
    * key is the SSN
    * value is your psychological profile
* IP-to-WWW address tables
    * key is the domain
    * value is the IP

### Simple List-Based Map

``` java
public class ListBasedMap<K, V> implements SimpleMap<K, V> {
    private List<MapEntry> list = new LinkedList<MapEntry>();

    private class MapEntry {
        public K key;
        public V value;

        public MapEntry(K key, V value) {
            this.key = key;
            this.value = value;
        }
    }

    @Override
    public V put(K key, V value) {
        if (key == null)
            throw new IllegalARguementException();
        for (MapEntry entry : list) {
            if (entry.key.equals(keys)) {
                V ret = entry.value;
                entry.value = value;
                return ret;
            }
        }

        list.add(new MapEntry(key, value));
        return null;
    }

    @Override
    public V get(k key) {
        for (MapEntry entry : list) {
            if (entry.key.equals(key)) {
                return entry.value;
            }
        }
        return null;
    }

    @Override
	public V remove(K key) {
		Iterator<MapEntry> iter = list.iterator();
		while (iter.hasNext()) {
			MapEntry entry = iter.next();
			if (entry.key.equals(key)) {
				V ret = entry.value;
				iter.remove();
				return ret;
			}
		}

		return null;
	}

	@Override
	public boolean containsKey(K key) {
		for (MapEntry entry : list) {
			if (entry.key.equals(key)) {
				return true;
			}
		}
		return false;
	}

	@Override
	public int size() {
		return list.size();
	}

	@Override
	public Iterator<K> keyIterator() {
		return new KeyIterator();
	}

	private class KeyIterator implements Iterator<K> {
		private Iterator<MapEntry> iter = list.iterator();

		@Override
		public boolean hasNext() {
			return iter.hasNext();
		}

		@Override
		public K next() {
			return iter.next().key;
		}

		@Override
		public void remove() {
			iter.remove();
		}
	}
}
```

With list, put(), get(), contains(), remove() take O(n) because you have to make sure the value exists.

But with BST they take O(logn), unless it's a degenerate tree.

## Hash tables

A specific type of Map that is implemented through a hash function and an array in the back.
Worst-case performance is linear BUT normal-case performance is INSTANANEOUS for add, search, and remove - the theoretical best performance.

If two objects get digested and modulo'd and end up at the same array index we have a COLLISION (collison of indices).
This is a performance degrading event, and hash table lore is all about how to minimize collisions.
If we have a COLLISION, it is potentionally performance degrading.
A few collisions are OK: e.g. we have a maximum 5 people in a linked list at a hash-table index, we could check them in O(1).

Because of chaining, hash tables are said to contain buckets, where each index is a bucket that may have several elements in it,
analogously to a physical bucket of parts in a workshop.

When collisions occur, we have two methods to continue operating:

1. Chaining: putting mutliple elements in a linked list or analogous strucutre rooted at the array index.
2. Linear probing: we do NOT accept multiple elements per index: instead we try to put a colliding element in an empty index!
It is linear because we search linearly for an empty location.
    * How do we find elements in a hash table that uses linear probing?
    We check to initial element; then we start looking for the element at successive indices; stopping either when we found it or we found na empty location.
    If we have gaps, we should wrap the search around the end of the array, stopping at the index just before the collision index.
    This situation is exacerbated by deletes.
    Random dletes will leave gaps in the array, potentially terminating searchs early.
    We use TOMBSTONE values instead of gaps when we delete to tell the search loop to keep looking for it's target.
    Too many tombstones can degrade the performance of searches.

Linear probing is extremely good in practice because processors can load entire tables in cache memory and check the entire table extremely fast,
for the cost of a couple memory lookups.