# Lecture 34

## Hash tables

A specific type of Map that is implemented through a hash function and an array in the back.
Worst-case performance is linear BUT normal-case performance is INSTANANEOUS for add, search, and remove - the theoretical best performance.

If two objects get digested and modulo'd and end up at the same array index we have a COLLISION (collison of indices).
This is a performance degrading event, and hash table lore is all about how to minimize collisions.
If we have a COLLISION, it is potentionally performance degrading.
A few collisions are OK: e.g. we have a maximum 5 people in a linked list at a hash-table index, we could check them in O(1).

Because of chaining, hash tables are said to contain buckets, where each index is a bucket that may have several elements in it,
analogously to a physical bucket of parts in a workshop.

When collisions occur, we have two methods to continue operating:

1. Chaining: putting mutliple elements in a linked list or analogous strucutre rooted at the array index.
2. Linear probing: we do NOT accept multiple elements per index: instead we try to put a colliding element in an empty index!
It is linear because we search linearly for an empty location.
    * How do we find elements in a hash table that uses linear probing?
    We check to initial element; then we start looking for the element at successive indices; stopping either when we found it or we found na empty location.
    If we have gaps, we should wrap the search around the end of the array, stopping at the index just before the collision index.
    This situation is exacerbated by deletes.
    Random dletes will leave gaps in the array, potentially terminating searchs early.
    We use TOMBSTONE values instead of gaps when we delete to tell the search loop to keep looking for it's target.
    Too many tombstones can degrade the performance of searches.

Linear probing is extremely good in practice because processors can load entire tables in cache memory and check the entire table extremely fast,
for the cost of a couple memory lookups.