# Lecture 38

**EXAM** Breath-first search will be on the final

## More general graphs

* In a directed graph, edges are ordered pairs.
* A multigraph allows multiple edges between two vertices.
* A pseudograph is a multigraph that allows loops (edges from a vertix to itself)

## Edges and degrees

?? 

## Handshaking Theorem

?? will not be on final exam (most likely)

## Path

A path of length k is a sequence of vertices such at k-  1 is an edge of G

A simple path has no repeated vertices.

## Cycle

A cycle is a path that starts and ends at the same vertex.

A simple cycle has no repeated vertices.

## Subgraph

A subgraph H of G is a graph, its edges and vertices are subsets of those of G.

## Connectivity

G is connected if there is a path between every pair of vertices.

If G is not connected, the maximmally connected subgraphs are the connected components of G.

**EXAM** What are the connected components of G? REMEMBER: to be connected, it has to connect to every part of the graph.

## Strong & Weak Connectivity

A directed graph is strongly connected if every two vertices are reachable from each other.

It is weakly connected if the underlying undirected graph is connected.

## Weighted graph

Not going going to be on the final.

## Adjacency Matrix

Store a 2d array as a graph.

Storage: $O(|V|^2)$

Good with big graphs that are dense.

Operation time of Adjanecy matrix:

Scan incident edges: AdjacentList

??

## Breath first search

```
BFS(G,s):
    let Q be an empty queue
    foreach node v in G except S
        color(v) = white
```